data analytics
    Analytics programs allow businesses to access the untapped value locked within their data.
    We collect data from many sources to derive insights
    data anlytics is growing because of growing data, cheaper storage and growing computing power
    data can be structural data or unstructured data, 
    stractural data is rectangular and can be represented in a table, eg. saving a persons details, name , surname, id 
    unstructured data cannot be represented as a table, such as images, audio and video and cannot be added to a spread sheet 

data types.

    A data element is an attribute about a person, place, or thing containing data within a range of values. 
    Data elements also describe characteristics of activities, including orders, transactions, and events. 
    A data type limits the values a data element can have
    Individual data types support structured, unstructured, and semi-structured data
    Tabular data is data organized into a table, made up of columns and rows
    Structured data is tabular in nature and organized into rows and columns.
    The character data type limits data entry to only valid characters. 
    Characters can include the alphabet that you might see on your keyboard, as well as numbers.
    Alphanumeric is the most widely used data type for storing character-based data.
    Strong typing is when technology rigidly enforces data types
    Weak typing loosely enforces data types

qualitative & quantitative data

    Quantitative data consists of numeric values. Data elements whose values come from counting or measuring are quantitative
    Qualitative data consists of frequent text values. Data elements whose values describe characteristics, traits, and attitudes are all qualitative

discrete and continuous

    discrete data represents measurements that can't be subdivided.
    when you measure things like height and weight, you are collecting continuous data

Relational and nonrelation data

    A nonrelational database does not have a predefined structure based on tabular data
    Relational databases excel at storing and processing structured data
    The need to interact with unstructured data is one of the reasons behind the rise of nonrelational databases
    Cardinality refers to the relationship between two entities, showing how many instances of one entity relate to instances in another entity
    A unary relationship is when an entity has a connection with itself. For example, a unary relationship where a single manager has multiple employees.

    Relational
        consistancy
        security
        ease of backup
    
    nonrelational data is stored on ke-value basis
        flexibility
        scalibility
        cost effective  

key value database

    A key-value database is one of the simplest ways of storing data. 
    Data is stored as a collection of keys and their corresponding values. 
    A key must be globally unique across the entire database.
    The use of keys differs from a relational database, where a given key identifies an individual row in a specific table. 
    There are no structural limits on the values of a key. 
    A key can be a sequence of numbers, alphanumeric strings, or some other combination of values. 
    The data that corresponds with a key can be any structured or unstructured data type

document database

    A document database is similar to a key-value database, with additional restrictions
    In a key-value database, the value can contain anything. 
    With a document database, the value is restricted to a specific structured format

column-family database

    Column-family databases use an index to identify data in groups of related columns.

Graph databases

    Graph databases specialize in exploring relationships between pieces of data.
    Relational models focus on mapping the relationships between entities. 
    Graph models map relationships between actual pieces of data
    Understanding the connection between products is a challenge that graphs solve with ease.

Database use cases

    Different business needs require different database designs. 
    While all databases store data, the database's structure needs to match its intended purpose
    Business requirements impact the design of individual tables and how they are interconnected

    Databases tend to support two major categories of data processing: 
        Online Transactional Processing (OLTP) and Online Analytical Processing (OLAP).

        Online Transactional Processing
        OLTP systems handle the transactions we encounter every day
        OLTP databases need to balance transactional read and write performance, resulting in a highly normalized design
        Typically, OLTP databases are in 3NF.
    Normalization-Normalization is a process for structuring a database in a way that minimizes duplication of data.
    One of the principles is that a given piece of data is stored once and only once.
    First normal form (1NF) is when every row in a table is unique and every column contains a unique value
    Second normal form (2NF) starts where 1NF leaves off. In addition to each row being unique, 
    2NF applies an additional rule stating that all nonprimary key values must depend on the entire primary key
    Third normal form (3NF) builds upon 2NF by adding a rule stating all columns must depend on only the primary key.

    Online analytical Processing
        OLAP systems focus on the ability of organizations to analyze data.
        databases that power OLAP systems have a denormalized design
        denormalization results in wider tables than those found in an OLTP database
    
    Schema Concepts
    The design of a database schema depends on the purpose it serves.
    Data warehouses serve the entire organization
    A data mart is a subset of a data warehouse  
    data marts focus on the needs of a particular department within the organization.
    A data lake stores raw data in its native format instead of conforming to a relational database structure
    Using a data lake requires additional knowledge about the raw data to make it analytically useful

Data acquisition Concepts
    Data can come from internal systems you operate, or you can obtain it from third-party sources

    Integration
    You need to retrieve, reshape, and insert data to move data between operational and analytical environments

        ETL
            Extract:  In the first phase, you extract data from the source system and place it in a staging area. The goal of the extract phase is to move data from a relational database into a flat file as quickly as possible.
            Transform:  The second phase transforms the data. The goal is to reformat the data from its transactional structure to the data warehouse's analytical design.
            Load:  The purpose of the load phase is to ensure data gets into the analytical system as quickly as possible.

        Data Collection Methods

        application programming interface (API)
        A structured method for computer systems to exchange information. 
        APIs provide a consistent interface to calling applications, regardless of the internal database structure.
        APIs represent a specific piece of business functionality.

    Working with data
    Whenever a SQL query executes, the database has to parse the query. 
    Parsing translates the human-readable SQL into code the database understands


Data Quality Challenges

    Duplicate Data
    Duplicate data occurs when data representing the same transaction is accidentally duplicated within a system.
    Humans are primarily responsible for creating duplicate data

    Redundant Data
    redundant data happens when the same data elements exist in multiple places within a system
    Frequently, data redundancy is a function of integrating multiple systems.
    There are several options for resolving redundant data. 
    One approach synchronizes changes to shared data elements between the Accounting and Sales systems

    Missing Values
    Another issue that impacts data quality is the concept of missing values. 
    Missing values occur when you expect an attribute to contain data but nothing is there. 
    A null value is the absence of a value. A null is not a space, blank, or other character
    
    Invalid Data
    Invalid data are values outside the valid range for a given attribute. 
    An invalid value violates a business rule instead of having an incorrect data type
    Invalid values violate business rules, not technical rules. 
    For example, –99,999 is a valid number, but it is an invalid temperature for a location on Earth

    Nonparametric Data
    Nonparametric data is data collected from categorical variables

    Data Outliers
    A data outlier is a value that differs significantly from other observations in a dataset
    With outliers, you need to understand why they exist and whether they are valid in the context of your analysis.

    Specification Mismatch
    A specification describes the target value for a component. 
    A specification mismatch occurs when an individual component's characteristics are beyond the range of acceptable values.

    Data Type Validation
    Data type validation ensures that values in a dataset have a consistent data type.
    
